INSTALL.md, before:

You can install Neovim from [download](#install-from-download), [package](#install-from-package), or [source](#install-from-source) in just a few seconds.

---

- To start Neovim, run `nvim` (not `neovim`).
    - [Discover plugins](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/wiki/Related-projects#plugins).
- Before upgrading to a new version, **check [Breaking Changes](https://neovim.io/doc/user/news.html#news-breaking).**
- For config (vimrc) see [the FAQ](https://neovim.io/doc/user/faq.html#faq-general).

---

Install from download
=====================

Downloads are available on the [Releases](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases) page.

* Latest [stable release](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest)
    * [macOS x86_64](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-macos-x86_64.tar.gz)
    * [macOS arm64](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-macos-arm64.tar.gz)
    * [Linux x86_64](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-linux-x86_64.tar.gz)
    * [Linux arm64](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-linux-arm64.tar.gz)
    * [Windows](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-win64.msi)
* Latest [development prerelease](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/nightly)


Install from package
====================

Packages are listed below. (You can also [build Neovim from source](#install-from-source).)

## Windows

Windows 8+ is required. Windows 7 or older is not supported.

### [Winget](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/package-manager/winget/)

- **Release:** `winget install Neovim.Neovim`

### [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org)

- **Latest Release:** `choco install neovim` (use -y for automatically skipping confirmation messages)
- **Development (pre-release):** `choco install neovim --pre`

### [Scoop](https://scoop.sh/)
```
scoop bucket add main
scoop install neovim
```
- **Release:** `scoop install neovim`

Several Neovim GUIs are available from scoop (extras): [scoop.sh/#/apps?q=neovim](https://scoop.sh/#/apps?q=neovim)

### Pre-built archives

0. If you are missing `VCRUNTIME140.dll`, install the [Visual Studio 2015 C++ redistributable](https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/kb/2977003) (choose x86_64 or x86 depending on your system).
1. Choose a package (**nvim-winXX.zip**) from the [releases page](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases).
2. Unzip the package. Any location is fine, administrator privileges are _not_ required.
    - `$VIMRUNTIME` will be set to that location automatically.
3. Run `nvim.exe` from a terminal.

**Optional** steps:

- Add the `bin` folder (e.g. `C:\Program Files\nvim\bin`) to your PATH.
    - This makes it easy to run `nvim` from anywhere.
- If `:set spell` does not work, create the `%LOCALAPPDATA%/nvim-data/site/spell` folder.
  You can then copy your spell files over (for English, located
  [here](https://github.com/vim/vim/blob/master/runtime/spell/en.utf-8.spl) and
  [here](https://github.com/vim/vim/blob/master/runtime/spell/en.utf-8.sug));
- For Python plugins you need the `pynvim` module. "Virtual envs" are recommended. After activating the virtual env do `pip install pynvim` (in *both*). Edit your `init.vim` so that it contains the path to the env's Python executable:
    ```vim
    let g:python3_host_prog='C:/Users/foo/Envs/neovim3/Scripts/python.exe'
    ```
    - Run `:checkhealth` and read `:help provider-python`.
- **init.vim ("vimrc"):** If you already have Vim installed you can copy `%userprofile%\_vimrc` to `%userprofile%\AppData\Local\nvim\init.vim` to use your Vim config with Neovim.


## macOS / OS X

### Pre-built archives

The [Releases](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases) page provides pre-built binaries for macOS 10.15+.

For x86_64:

    curl -LO https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/download/nightly/nvim-macos-x86_64.tar.gz
    tar xzf nvim-macos-x86_64.tar.gz
    ./nvim-macos-x86_64/bin/nvim

For arm64:

    curl -LO https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/download/nightly/nvim-macos-arm64.tar.gz
    tar xzf nvim-macos-arm64.tar.gz
    ./nvim-macos-arm64/bin/nvim

### [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) on macOS or Linux

    brew install neovim

### [MacPorts](https://www.macports.org/)

    sudo port selfupdate
    sudo port install neovim

## Linux

### Pre-built archives

The [Releases](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases) page provides pre-built binaries for Linux systems.

```sh
curl -LO https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-linux-x86_64.tar.gz
sudo rm -rf /opt/nvim
sudo tar -C /opt -xzf nvim-linux-x86_64.tar.gz
```

Then add this to your shell config (`~/.bashrc`, `~/.zshrc`, ...):

    export PATH="$PATH:/opt/nvim-linux-x86_64/bin"

### AppImage ("universal" Linux package)

The [Releases](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases) page provides an [AppImage](https://appimage.org) that runs on most Linux systems. No installation is needed, just download `nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage` and run it. (It might not work if your Linux distribution is more than 4 years old.) The following instructions assume an `x86_64` architecture; on ARM Linux replace with `arm64`.

    curl -LO https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage
    chmod u+x nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage
    ./nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage

To expose nvim globally:

    mkdir -p /opt/nvim
    mv nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage /opt/nvim/nvim

And the following line to your shell config (`~/.bashrc`, `~/.zshrc`, ...):

    export PATH="$PATH:/opt/nvim/"

If the `./nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage` command fails, try:
```sh
./nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage --appimage-extract
./squashfs-root/AppRun --version

# Optional: exposing nvim globally.
sudo mv squashfs-root /
sudo ln -s /squashfs-root/AppRun /usr/bin/nvim
nvim
```

### Arch Linux

Neovim can be installed from the community repository:

    sudo pacman -S neovim

Alternatively, Neovim can be also installed using the PKGBUILD [`neovim-git`](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/neovim-git), available on the [AUR](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Arch_User_Repository).

Alternatively, Neovim Nightly builds can be also installed using the PKGBUILD [`neovim-nightly-bin`](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/neovim-nightly-bin), available on the [AUR](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Arch_User_Repository).

The Python module is available from the community repository:

    sudo pacman -S python-pynvim

Ruby modules (currently only supported in `neovim-git`) are available from the AUR as [`ruby-neovim`](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/ruby-neovim).

### CentOS 8 / RHEL 8

Neovim is available through [EPEL (Extra Packages for Enterprise Linux)](https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/EPEL)

    yum install -y https://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/epel-release-latest-8.noarch.rpm
    yum install -y neovim python3-neovim

### Clear Linux OS

Neovim is available through the [neovim bundle](https://github.com/clearlinux/clr-bundles/blob/master/bundles/neovim)

    sudo swupd bundle-add neovim

Python (`:python`) support is available if the [python-basic bundle](https://github.com/clearlinux/clr-bundles/blob/master/bundles/python-basic) is installed.

    sudo swupd bundle-add python-basic

### Debian

Neovim is in [Debian](https://packages.debian.org/search?keywords=neovim).

    sudo apt-get install neovim

Python (`:python`) support is installable via the package manager on Debian unstable.

    sudo apt-get install python3-neovim

### Exherbo Linux

Exhereses for scm and released versions are currently available in repository `::medvid`. Python client (with GTK+ GUI included) and Qt5 GUI are also available as suggestions:

    cave resolve app-editors/neovim --take dev-python/neovim-python --take app-editors/neovim-qt

### Fedora

Neovim is in [Fedora](https://src.fedoraproject.org/rpms/neovim) starting with Fedora 25:

    sudo dnf install -y neovim python3-neovim

You can also get nightly builds of git master from the [Copr automated build system](https://copr.fedoraproject.org/coprs/agriffis/neovim-nightly/):

    dnf copr enable agriffis/neovim-nightly
    dnf install -y neovim python3-neovim

See the [blog post](https://arongriffis.com/2019-03-02-neovim-nightly-builds) for information on how these are built.

### Flatpak

You can find Neovim on [Flathub](https://flathub.org/apps/details/io.neovim.nvim). Providing you have Flatpak [set up](https://flatpak.org/setup/):

    flatpak install flathub io.neovim.nvim
    flatpak run io.neovim.nvim

You can add `/var/lib/flatpak/exports/bin` (or `~/.local/share/flatpak/exports/bin` if you used `--user`) to the `$PATH` and run it with `io.neovim.nvim`.

Note that Flatpak'ed Neovim will look for `init.vim` in `~/.var/app/io.neovim.nvim/config/nvim` instead of `~/.config/nvim`.

### Gentoo Linux

An ebuild is available in Gentoo's official portage repository:

    emerge -a app-editors/neovim

### GNU Guix

Neovim can be installed with:

    guix install neovim

### GoboLinux

Neovim can be installed with:

    sudo -H Compile NeoVim

### Nix / NixOS

Neovim can be installed with:

    nix-env -iA nixpkgs.neovim

Or alternatively, if you use flakes:

    nix profile install nixpkgs#neovim

### Mageia 7

    urpmi neovim

To install the Python modules:

    urpmi python3-pynvim

### makedeb Package Repository (MPR)

Neovim is available inside the [MPR](https://mpr.makedeb.org/packages/neovim). You can install it with:

    git clone https://mpr.makedeb.org/neovim
    cd neovim/
    makedeb -si

### OpenSUSE

Neovim can be installed with:

    sudo zypper in neovim

To install the Python modules:

    sudo zypper in python-neovim python3-neovim

### PLD Linux

Neovim is in [PLD Linux](https://github.com/pld-linux/neovim):

    poldek -u neovim
    poldek -u python-neovim python3-neovim
    poldek -u python-neovim-gui python3-neovim-gui

### Slackware

See [neovim on SlackBuilds](https://slackbuilds.org/apps/neovim/).

### Source Mage

Neovim can be installed using the Sorcery package manager:

    cast neovim

### Solus

Neovim can be installed using the default package manager in Solus (eopkg):

    sudo eopkg install neovim

### Snap

Neovim nightly and stable are available on the [snap store](https://snapcraft.io/nvim).

**Stable Builds**

```sh
sudo snap install nvim --classic
```

**Nightly Builds**

```sh
sudo snap install --edge nvim --classic
```

### Ubuntu
As in Debian, Neovim is in [Ubuntu](https://packages.ubuntu.com/search?keywords=neovim).

    sudo apt install neovim

Python (`:python`) support seems to be automatically installed

    sudo apt install python3-neovim

Neovim has been added to a "Personal Package Archive" (PPA). This allows you to install it with `apt-get`. Follow the links to the PPAs to see which versions of Ubuntu are currently available via the PPA. Choose **stable** or **unstable**:

- [https://launchpad.net/~neovim-ppa/+archive/ubuntu/**stable**](https://launchpad.net/~neovim-ppa/+archive/ubuntu/stable)
- [https://launchpad.net/~neovim-ppa/+archive/ubuntu/**unstable**](https://launchpad.net/~neovim-ppa/+archive/ubuntu/unstable)

**Important:** The Neovim team does not maintain the PPA packages. For problems or questions about the PPA specifically contact https://launchpad.net/~neovim-ppa.

To be able to use **add-apt-repository** you may need to install software-properties-common:

    sudo apt-get install software-properties-common

If you're using an older version Ubuntu you must use:

    sudo apt-get install python-software-properties

Run the following commands:

    sudo add-apt-repository ppa:neovim-ppa/stable
    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install neovim

Prerequisites for the Python modules:

    sudo apt-get install python-dev python-pip python3-dev python3-pip

If you're using an older version Ubuntu you must use:

    sudo apt-get install python-dev python-pip python3-dev
    sudo apt-get install python3-setuptools
    sudo easy_install3 pip

### Void-Linux

Neovim can be installed using the xbps package manager

    sudo xbps-install -S neovim

### Alpine Linux

Neovim can be installed using the apk package manager

    sudo apk add neovim

## BSD

### FreeBSD

Neovim can be installed using [`pkg(8)`](https://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=pkg&sektion=8&n=1):

    pkg install neovim

or [from the ports tree](https://www.freshports.org/editors/neovim/):

    cd /usr/ports/editors/neovim/ && make install clean

To install the pynvim Python modules using [`pkg(8)`](https://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=pkg&sektion=8&n=1) run:

    pkg install py36-pynvim

### OpenBSD

Neovim can be installed using [`pkg_add(1)`](https://man.openbsd.org/pkg_add):

    pkg_add neovim

or [from the ports tree](https://cvsweb.openbsd.org/cgi-bin/cvsweb/ports/editors/neovim/):

    cd /usr/ports/editors/neovim/ && make install

## Android

[Termux](https://github.com/termux/termux-app) offers a Neovim package.


Install from source
===================

If a package is not provided for your platform, you can build Neovim from source. See [BUILD.md](./BUILD.md) for details.  If you have the [prerequisites](./BUILD.md#build-prerequisites) then building is easy:

    make CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
    sudo make install

For Unix-like systems this installs Neovim to `/usr/local`, while for Windows to `C:\Program Files`. Note, however, that this can complicate uninstallation. The following example avoids this by isolating an installation under `$HOME/neovim`:

    rm -r build/  # clear the CMake cache
    make CMAKE_EXTRA_FLAGS="-DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$HOME/neovim"
    make install
    export PATH="$HOME/neovim/bin:$PATH"

## Uninstall

There is a CMake target to _uninstall_ after `make install`:

```sh
sudo cmake --build build/ --target uninstall
```

Alternatively, just delete the `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX` artifacts:

```sh
sudo rm /usr/local/bin/nvim
sudo rm -r /usr/local/share/nvim/
```

Commit message:

feat(provider): improve Neovim detection of pynvim
Problem: Detection of the pynvim module is currently done by finding the
first Python interpreter in the `PATH` and checking if it can import
pynvim.  This has several effects:

- Activation of an unrelated Python virtual environment will break
  automatic detection, unless pynvim is also installed in that
  environment.

- Installing pynvim to the expected location is difficult. User
  installation into the system-wide or user-wide Python site area is now
  deprecated.  On Ubuntu 24.04 with Python 3.12, for example, the
  command `pip install --user pynvim` now fails with the error message
  `error: externally-managed-environment`.

- Users may create a dedicated virtual environment in which to install
  pynvim, but Neovim won't detect it; instead, they must either activate
  it before launching Neovim (which interferes with the user of other
  virtual environments) or else hard-code the variable
  `g:python3_host_prog` in their `init.vim` to the path of the correct
  Python interpreter.  Neither option is desirable.

Solution: Expose pynvim's Python interpreter on the `PATH` under the
name `pynvim-python`.  In the typical flow:

- User installs either uv or pipx.

- User installs pynvim via:

      uv tool install --upgrade pynvim
      # Or:
      pipx install --upgrade pynvim

With corresponding changes in pynvim, the above is all that's needed for
Neovim to detect the installed location of pynvim, even if an unrelated
Python virtual environments is activated.  It uses standard Python
tooling to automate the necessary creation of a Python virtual
environment for pyenv and the publication of `pynvim-python` to a
directory on `PATH`.

See https://github.com/neovim/pynvim/issues/593 for additional
discussion of this idea.

INSTALL.md, after:

You can install Neovim from [download](#install-from-download), [package](#install-from-package), or [source](#install-from-source) in just a few seconds.

---

- To start Neovim, run `nvim` (not `neovim`).
    - [Discover plugins](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/wiki/Related-projects#plugins).
- Before upgrading to a new version, **check [Breaking Changes](https://neovim.io/doc/user/news.html#news-breaking).**
- For config (vimrc) see [the FAQ](https://neovim.io/doc/user/faq.html#faq-general).

---

Install from download
=====================

Downloads are available on the [Releases](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases) page.

* Latest [stable release](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest)
    * [macOS x86_64](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-macos-x86_64.tar.gz)
    * [macOS arm64](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-macos-arm64.tar.gz)
    * [Linux x86_64](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-linux-x86_64.tar.gz)
    * [Linux arm64](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-linux-arm64.tar.gz)
    * [Windows](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-win64.msi)
* Latest [development prerelease](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/nightly)


Install from package
====================

Packages are listed below. (You can also [build Neovim from source](#install-from-source).)

## Windows

Windows 8+ is required. Windows 7 or older is not supported.

### [Winget](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/package-manager/winget/)

- **Release:** `winget install Neovim.Neovim`

### [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org)

- **Latest Release:** `choco install neovim` (use -y for automatically skipping confirmation messages)
- **Development (pre-release):** `choco install neovim --pre`

### [Scoop](https://scoop.sh/)
```
scoop bucket add main
scoop install neovim
```
- **Release:** `scoop install neovim`

Several Neovim GUIs are available from scoop (extras): [scoop.sh/#/apps?q=neovim](https://scoop.sh/#/apps?q=neovim)

### Pre-built archives

0. If you are missing `VCRUNTIME140.dll`, install the [Visual Studio 2015 C++ redistributable](https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/kb/2977003) (choose x86_64 or x86 depending on your system).
1. Choose a package (**nvim-winXX.zip**) from the [releases page](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases).
2. Unzip the package. Any location is fine, administrator privileges are _not_ required.
    - `$VIMRUNTIME` will be set to that location automatically.
3. Run `nvim.exe` from a terminal.

**Optional** steps:

- Add the `bin` folder (e.g. `C:\Program Files\nvim\bin`) to your PATH.
    - This makes it easy to run `nvim` from anywhere.
- If `:set spell` does not work, create the `%LOCALAPPDATA%/nvim-data/site/spell` folder.
  You can then copy your spell files over (for English, located
  [here](https://github.com/vim/vim/blob/master/runtime/spell/en.utf-8.spl) and
  [here](https://github.com/vim/vim/blob/master/runtime/spell/en.utf-8.sug));
- For Python plugins you need the `pynvim` module. Installation via uv
  (https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) is recommended; the `--upgrade` switch ensures
  installation of the latest version:
    ```
    uv tool install --upgrade pynvim
    ```
    - Run `:checkhealth` and read `:help provider-python` for more details.
- **init.vim ("vimrc"):** If you already have Vim installed you can copy `%userprofile%\_vimrc` to `%userprofile%\AppData\Local\nvim\init.vim` to use your Vim config with Neovim.


## macOS / OS X

### Pre-built archives

The [Releases](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases) page provides pre-built binaries for macOS 10.15+.

For x86_64:

    curl -LO https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/download/nightly/nvim-macos-x86_64.tar.gz
    tar xzf nvim-macos-x86_64.tar.gz
    ./nvim-macos-x86_64/bin/nvim

For arm64:

    curl -LO https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/download/nightly/nvim-macos-arm64.tar.gz
    tar xzf nvim-macos-arm64.tar.gz
    ./nvim-macos-arm64/bin/nvim

### [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) on macOS or Linux

    brew install neovim

### [MacPorts](https://www.macports.org/)

    sudo port selfupdate
    sudo port install neovim

## Linux

### Pre-built archives

The [Releases](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases) page provides pre-built binaries for Linux systems.

```sh
curl -LO https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-linux-x86_64.tar.gz
sudo rm -rf /opt/nvim
sudo tar -C /opt -xzf nvim-linux-x86_64.tar.gz
```

Then add this to your shell config (`~/.bashrc`, `~/.zshrc`, ...):

    export PATH="$PATH:/opt/nvim-linux-x86_64/bin"

### AppImage ("universal" Linux package)

The [Releases](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases) page provides an [AppImage](https://appimage.org) that runs on most Linux systems. No installation is needed, just download `nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage` and run it. (It might not work if your Linux distribution is more than 4 years old.) The following instructions assume an `x86_64` architecture; on ARM Linux replace with `arm64`.

    curl -LO https://github.com/neovim/neovim/releases/latest/download/nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage
    chmod u+x nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage
    ./nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage

To expose nvim globally:

    mkdir -p /opt/nvim
    mv nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage /opt/nvim/nvim

And the following line to your shell config (`~/.bashrc`, `~/.zshrc`, ...):

    export PATH="$PATH:/opt/nvim/"

If the `./nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage` command fails, try:
```sh
./nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage --appimage-extract
./squashfs-root/AppRun --version

# Optional: exposing nvim globally.
sudo mv squashfs-root /
sudo ln -s /squashfs-root/AppRun /usr/bin/nvim
nvim
```

### Arch Linux

Neovim can be installed from the community repository:

    sudo pacman -S neovim

Alternatively, Neovim can be also installed using the PKGBUILD [`neovim-git`](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/neovim-git), available on the [AUR](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Arch_User_Repository).

Alternatively, Neovim Nightly builds can be also installed using the PKGBUILD [`neovim-nightly-bin`](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/neovim-nightly-bin), available on the [AUR](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Arch_User_Repository).

The Python module is available from the community repository:

    sudo pacman -S python-pynvim

Ruby modules (currently only supported in `neovim-git`) are available from the AUR as [`ruby-neovim`](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/ruby-neovim).

### CentOS 8 / RHEL 8

Neovim is available through [EPEL (Extra Packages for Enterprise Linux)](https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/EPEL)

    yum install -y https://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/epel-release-latest-8.noarch.rpm
    yum install -y neovim python3-neovim

### Clear Linux OS

Neovim is available through the [neovim bundle](https://github.com/clearlinux/clr-bundles/blob/master/bundles/neovim)

    sudo swupd bundle-add neovim

Python (`:python`) support is available if the [python-basic bundle](https://github.com/clearlinux/clr-bundles/blob/master/bundles/python-basic) is installed.

    sudo swupd bundle-add python-basic

### Debian

Neovim is in [Debian](https://packages.debian.org/search?keywords=neovim).

    sudo apt-get install neovim

Python (`:python`) support is installable via the package manager on Debian unstable.

    sudo apt-get install python3-neovim

### Exherbo Linux

Exhereses for scm and released versions are currently available in repository `::medvid`. Python client (with GTK+ GUI included) and Qt5 GUI are also available as suggestions:

    cave resolve app-editors/neovim --take dev-python/neovim-python --take app-editors/neovim-qt

### Fedora

Neovim is in [Fedora](https://src.fedoraproject.org/rpms/neovim) starting with Fedora 25:

    sudo dnf install -y neovim python3-neovim

You can also get nightly builds of git master from the [Copr automated build system](https://copr.fedoraproject.org/coprs/agriffis/neovim-nightly/):

    dnf copr enable agriffis/neovim-nightly
    dnf install -y neovim python3-neovim

See the [blog post](https://arongriffis.com/2019-03-02-neovim-nightly-builds) for information on how these are built.

### Flatpak

You can find Neovim on [Flathub](https://flathub.org/apps/details/io.neovim.nvim). Providing you have Flatpak [set up](https://flatpak.org/setup/):

    flatpak install flathub io.neovim.nvim
    flatpak run io.neovim.nvim

You can add `/var/lib/flatpak/exports/bin` (or `~/.local/share/flatpak/exports/bin` if you used `--user`) to the `$PATH` and run it with `io.neovim.nvim`.

Note that Flatpak'ed Neovim will look for `init.vim` in `~/.var/app/io.neovim.nvim/config/nvim` instead of `~/.config/nvim`.

### Gentoo Linux

An ebuild is available in Gentoo's official portage repository:

    emerge -a app-editors/neovim

### GNU Guix

Neovim can be installed with:

    guix install neovim

### GoboLinux

Neovim can be installed with:

    sudo -H Compile NeoVim

### Nix / NixOS

Neovim can be installed with:

    nix-env -iA nixpkgs.neovim

Or alternatively, if you use flakes:

    nix profile install nixpkgs#neovim

### Mageia 7

    urpmi neovim

To install the Python modules:

    urpmi python3-pynvim

### makedeb Package Repository (MPR)

Neovim is available inside the [MPR](https://mpr.makedeb.org/packages/neovim). You can install it with:

    git clone https://mpr.makedeb.org/neovim
    cd neovim/
    makedeb -si

### OpenSUSE

Neovim can be installed with:

    sudo zypper in neovim

To install the Python modules:

    sudo zypper in python-neovim python3-neovim

### PLD Linux

Neovim is in [PLD Linux](https://github.com/pld-linux/neovim):

    poldek -u neovim
    poldek -u python-neovim python3-neovim
    poldek -u python-neovim-gui python3-neovim-gui

### Slackware

See [neovim on SlackBuilds](https://slackbuilds.org/apps/neovim/).

### Source Mage

Neovim can be installed using the Sorcery package manager:

    cast neovim

### Solus

Neovim can be installed using the default package manager in Solus (eopkg):

    sudo eopkg install neovim

### Snap

Neovim nightly and stable are available on the [snap store](https://snapcraft.io/nvim).

**Stable Builds**

```sh
sudo snap install nvim --classic
```

**Nightly Builds**

```sh
sudo snap install --edge nvim --classic
```

### Ubuntu
As in Debian, Neovim is in [Ubuntu](https://packages.ubuntu.com/search?keywords=neovim).

    sudo apt install neovim

Python (`:python`) support seems to be automatically installed

    sudo apt install python3-neovim

Neovim has been added to a "Personal Package Archive" (PPA). This allows you to install it with `apt-get`. Follow the links to the PPAs to see which versions of Ubuntu are currently available via the PPA. Choose **stable** or **unstable**:

- [https://launchpad.net/~neovim-ppa/+archive/ubuntu/**stable**](https://launchpad.net/~neovim-ppa/+archive/ubuntu/stable)
- [https://launchpad.net/~neovim-ppa/+archive/ubuntu/**unstable**](https://launchpad.net/~neovim-ppa/+archive/ubuntu/unstable)

**Important:** The Neovim team does not maintain the PPA packages. For problems or questions about the PPA specifically contact https://launchpad.net/~neovim-ppa.

To be able to use **add-apt-repository** you may need to install software-properties-common:

    sudo apt-get install software-properties-common

If you're using an older version Ubuntu you must use:

    sudo apt-get install python-software-properties

Run the following commands:

    sudo add-apt-repository ppa:neovim-ppa/stable
    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install neovim

Prerequisites for the Python modules:

    sudo apt-get install python-dev python-pip python3-dev python3-pip

If you're using an older version Ubuntu you must use:

    sudo apt-get install python-dev python-pip python3-dev
    sudo apt-get install python3-setuptools
    sudo easy_install3 pip

### Void-Linux

Neovim can be installed using the xbps package manager

    sudo xbps-install -S neovim

### Alpine Linux

Neovim can be installed using the apk package manager

    sudo apk add neovim

## BSD

### FreeBSD

Neovim can be installed using [`pkg(8)`](https://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=pkg&sektion=8&n=1):

    pkg install neovim

or [from the ports tree](https://www.freshports.org/editors/neovim/):

    cd /usr/ports/editors/neovim/ && make install clean

To install the pynvim Python modules using [`pkg(8)`](https://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=pkg&sektion=8&n=1) run:

    pkg install py36-pynvim

### OpenBSD

Neovim can be installed using [`pkg_add(1)`](https://man.openbsd.org/pkg_add):

    pkg_add neovim

or [from the ports tree](https://cvsweb.openbsd.org/cgi-bin/cvsweb/ports/editors/neovim/):

    cd /usr/ports/editors/neovim/ && make install

## Android

[Termux](https://github.com/termux/termux-app) offers a Neovim package.


Install from source
===================

If a package is not provided for your platform, you can build Neovim from source. See [BUILD.md](./BUILD.md) for details.  If you have the [prerequisites](./BUILD.md#build-prerequisites) then building is easy:

    make CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
    sudo make install

For Unix-like systems this installs Neovim to `/usr/local`, while for Windows to `C:\Program Files`. Note, however, that this can complicate uninstallation. The following example avoids this by isolating an installation under `$HOME/neovim`:

    rm -r build/  # clear the CMake cache
    make CMAKE_EXTRA_FLAGS="-DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$HOME/neovim"
    make install
    export PATH="$HOME/neovim/bin:$PATH"

## Uninstall

There is a CMake target to _uninstall_ after `make install`:

```sh
sudo cmake --build build/ --target uninstall
```

Alternatively, just delete the `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX` artifacts:

```sh
sudo rm /usr/local/bin/nvim
sudo rm -r /usr/local/share/nvim/
```
