.github/workflows/notes.md, before:

```
${NVIM_VERSION}
```

## Install

### Windows

#### Zip

1. Download **nvim-win64.zip**
2. Extract the zip
3. Run `nvim.exe` on your CLI of choice

#### MSI

1. Download **nvim-win64.msi**
2. Run the MSI
3. Run `nvim.exe` on your CLI of choice

Note: On Windows "Server" you may need to [install vcruntime140.dll](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/windows/latest-supported-vc-redist?view=msvc-170).

### macOS (x86_64)

1. Download **nvim-macos-x86_64.tar.gz**
2. Run `xattr -c ./nvim-macos-x86_64.tar.gz` (to avoid "unknown developer" warning)
3. Extract: `tar xzvf nvim-macos-x86_64.tar.gz`
4. Run `./nvim-macos-x86_64/bin/nvim`

### macOS (arm64)

1. Download **nvim-macos-arm64.tar.gz**
2. Run `xattr -c ./nvim-macos-arm64.tar.gz` (to avoid "unknown developer" warning)
3. Extract: `tar xzvf nvim-macos-arm64.tar.gz`
4. Run `./nvim-macos-arm64/bin/nvim`

### Linux (x86_64)

If your system does not have the required glibc version, try the (unsupported) [builds for older glibc](https://github.com/neovim/neovim-releases).

#### AppImage

1. Download **nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage**
2. Run `chmod u+x nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage && ./nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage`
   - If your system does not have FUSE you can [extract the appimage](https://github.com/AppImage/AppImageKit/wiki/FUSE#type-2-appimage):
     ```
     ./nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage --appimage-extract
     ./squashfs-root/usr/bin/nvim
     ```

#### Tarball

1. Download **nvim-linux-x86_64.tar.gz**
2. Extract: `tar xzvf nvim-linux-x86_64.tar.gz`
3. Run `./nvim-linux-x86_64/bin/nvim`

### Linux (arm64)

#### AppImage

1. Download **nvim-linux-arm64.appimage**
2. Run `chmod u+x nvim-linux-arm64.appimage && ./nvim-linux-arm64.appimage`
   - If your system does not have FUSE you can [extract the appimage](https://github.com/AppImage/AppImageKit/wiki/FUSE#type-2-appimage):
     ```
     ./nvim-linux-arm64.appimage --appimage-extract
     ./squashfs-root/usr/bin/nvim
     ```

#### Tarball

1. Download **nvim-linux-arm64.tar.gz**
2. Extract: `tar xzvf nvim-linux-arm64.tar.gz`
3. Run `./nvim-linux-arm64/bin/nvim`

### Other

- Install by [package manager](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/blob/master/INSTALL.md#install-from-package)

Commit message:

ci(release): link to release notes
fix #35580

.github/workflows/notes.md, after:

```
${NVIM_VERSION}
```

## Release notes

- [Changelog](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/commit/${NVIM_COMMIT}) (fixes + features)
- [News](./runtime/doc/news.txt) (`:help news` in Nvim)

## Install

### Windows

#### Zip

1. Download **nvim-win64.zip** (or **nvim-win-arm64.zip** for ARM)
2. Extract the zip
3. Run `nvim.exe` in your terminal

#### MSI

1. Download **nvim-win64.msi** (or **nvim-win-arm64.msi** for ARM)
2. Run the MSI
3. Run `nvim.exe` in your terminal

Note: On Windows "Server" you may need to [install vcruntime140.dll](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/windows/latest-supported-vc-redist?view=msvc-170).

### macOS (x86_64)

1. Download **nvim-macos-x86_64.tar.gz**
2. Run `xattr -c ./nvim-macos-x86_64.tar.gz` (to avoid "unknown developer" warning)
3. Extract: `tar xzvf nvim-macos-x86_64.tar.gz`
4. Run `./nvim-macos-x86_64/bin/nvim`

### macOS (arm64)

1. Download **nvim-macos-arm64.tar.gz**
2. Run `xattr -c ./nvim-macos-arm64.tar.gz` (to avoid "unknown developer" warning)
3. Extract: `tar xzvf nvim-macos-arm64.tar.gz`
4. Run `./nvim-macos-arm64/bin/nvim`

### Linux (x86_64)

If your system does not have the required glibc version, try the (unsupported) [builds for older glibc](https://github.com/neovim/neovim-releases).

#### AppImage

1. Download **nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage**
2. Run `chmod u+x nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage && ./nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage`
   - If your system does not have FUSE you can [extract the appimage](https://github.com/AppImage/AppImageKit/wiki/FUSE#type-2-appimage):
     ```
     ./nvim-linux-x86_64.appimage --appimage-extract
     ./squashfs-root/usr/bin/nvim
     ```

#### Tarball

1. Download **nvim-linux-x86_64.tar.gz**
2. Extract: `tar xzvf nvim-linux-x86_64.tar.gz`
3. Run `./nvim-linux-x86_64/bin/nvim`

### Linux (arm64)

#### AppImage

1. Download **nvim-linux-arm64.appimage**
2. Run `chmod u+x nvim-linux-arm64.appimage && ./nvim-linux-arm64.appimage`
   - If your system does not have FUSE you can [extract the appimage](https://github.com/AppImage/AppImageKit/wiki/FUSE#type-2-appimage):
     ```
     ./nvim-linux-arm64.appimage --appimage-extract
     ./squashfs-root/usr/bin/nvim
     ```

#### Tarball

1. Download **nvim-linux-arm64.tar.gz**
2. Extract: `tar xzvf nvim-linux-arm64.tar.gz`
3. Run `./nvim-linux-arm64/bin/nvim`

### Other

- Install by [package manager](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/blob/master/INSTALL.md#install-from-package)
